[Scout] Unify FTR migration planner and executor into one skill (#267480)
elastic/kibana: .agents/skills/scout-migrate-from-ftr/SKILL.md

Reviewer: This is looking really good overall 👍

---
name: scout-migrate-from-ftr
description: Single entry point for migrating Kibana Functional Test Runner (FTR) tests to Scout. Plans the migration first, asks the user to review the plan, then executes it. Use when migrating FTR tests to Scout, triaging FTR suites for Scout readiness, deciding UI vs API vs RTL/Jest, mapping FTR services/page objects/hooks to Scout fixtures, or splitting loadTestFile patterns.
---

# Migrate FTR to Scout

## Overview

This is the single entry point for FTR-to-Scout migrations. It runs a deliberate three-step workflow:

1. **Plan** — analyze the FTR suite end-to-end and write a `migration_plan.md` document.
2. **Review gate** — stop. Surface the plan to the user and wait for explicit approval before writing or moving any test code.

> 3. **Execute** — once approved, follow [`references/migration-execution.md`](references/migration-execution.md) to do the actual conversion.

Reviewer: Should we add a Step 4: run tests? This is the fun part: it will run the new tests and hopefully fix them until completion. I think running them and seeing the output will be very valuable before we can the migration as "done". The agent should keep working in a loop and run the tests up until most pass. 

It should likely reference this doc for instructions https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/main/docs/extend/scout/run-tests.md:

The review gate is the point of the workflow. The plan front-loads decisions (UI vs API vs RTL/Jest, parallelism, auth, server config, batching) so the user can correct course cheaply, before any code is rewritten. Do not skip it.

## Required sub-skill (planning step)

- **REQUIRED SUB-SKILL:** ftr-testing — to understand FTR structure, `loadTestFile`, configs, services, and page objects while analyzing the source suite.

The execution step's required sub-skills are listed in [`references/migration-execution.md`](references/migration-execution.md); do not load them until the user approves the plan.

## Inputs

Before starting, collect or confirm:

1. **FTR directory path**: the root of the FTR suite(s) to analyze (e.g. `x-pack/platform/test/functional/apps/dashboard`).
2. **FTR config path(s)**: the config file(s) that wire these tests (e.g. `x-pack/platform/test/functional/config.base.ts`). Walk up from the test directory if not provided.
3. **Target Scout module root**: where the Scout tests will live (e.g. `x-pack/platform/plugins/shared/dashboard`). If unknown, infer from the plugin that owns the FTR tests.

> 4. **Deployment targets**: stateful, serverless, or both. Default: both.

Reviewer: The planner should be able to understand 1) on which deployment targets the FTR tests are running 2) if it's possible that these tests can run on Cloud out-of-the-box (they shouldn't be using / setting custom configs) 3) if not, find ways to make them run on Elastic Cloud according to our [Design tests with a cloud-first mindset](https://www.elastic.co/docs/extend/kibana/scout/best-practices#design-tests-with-a-cloud-first-mindset). The migration plan should mention the steps the executor will have to take to make them compatible with Cloud and ideally just use the default test servers config.

To recap:

- Where do the FTR tests run today?
- Where should they ideally run in Scout? Ideally Platform tests should use `deploymentAgnostic` deployment tag, and solution-specific tests should run on stateful + the serverless solution-specific project(s)
- Can the tests run on Cloud out-of-the-box or will that be hard because FTR configs sets specific feature flags?
- Do we predict that the new Scout tests need a [custom servers config](https://www.elastic.co/docs/extend/kibana/scout/feature-flags#scout-feature-flags-custom-servers) or can they use the default test servers config?

> ## Step 1 — Plan

Reviewer: Do you think we could move this "Step 1 — Plan" section into a separate, dedicated file under the `references` folder? This is already quite a long document, and I think a planning file will improve readability for both humans and agents (plus, a plan may already be available, so in some cases there will be no need to parse this file at all).

In this new planning document, let's mention `ftr-testing` as a required subskill.

| **Brittle CSS selectors** | `find.byCssSelector(...)`, `find.byClassName(...)`, text-based lookups without `data-test-subj` |
| **Over-privileged execution** | Tests running as `superuser` that don't need elevated privileges |

For each smell, note the file and relevant context.

### 1.11 Propose migration batches

Group tests into ordered batches that can be migrated independently:

1. **Batch 1**: simplest tests, no new abstractions needed, all dependencies already exist
2. **Batch 2**: medium tests, may need new page objects or auth helpers (which batch 1 didn't require)
3. **Batch N**: complex tests, require new server config sets or depend on Scout capabilities that don't exist yet

For each batch:

- List the files included
- Human involvement: `autopilot` (executor can handle end-to-end), `guided` (needs a few human decisions or source code changes), or `hands-on` (significant manual work or missing infrastructure)
- Dependencies on previous batches (e.g. "needs the page object created in batch 2")
- Any blockers (missing Scout features, missing `data-test-subj` in source code)

### 1.12 Write the migration plan

> Output the plan to `migration_plan.md` in the target Scout module root, following [`references/output-template.md`](references/output-template.md) exactly.

Reviewer: > migration_plan.md

I think we should find a way to make this migration plan file name a bit more specific, still not sure how, but a developer may likely generate multiple `migration_plan.md` files so they can't have the same name.

Author: Good catch. Switched to `<source-dir-slug>-migration-plan.md` (e.g. `dashboard-migration-plan.md`) derived from the source directory.

Reviewer: That sounds good to me, but I think it should likely start with `migration-plan-<source-dir-slug>-<date>.md` (example: `migration-plan-painless_lab-2026-05-05`) so that all migration plans are easier to identify (because they all start with the same prefix).

## Step 2 — Review gate (stop)

After writing `migration_plan.md`, **stop**. Do not start touching test files. Surface the plan to the user with this message (substitute the real path):

> > I generated a migration plan at `<path-to-migration_plan.md>`. Please review it carefully — it captures the test-type decisions, batching, auth strategy, and any flagged risks before any code changes. Reply when you're ready to proceed with the migration, or with any corrections to the plan.

Reviewer: I think we should also output warnings / heads up in the conversaton itself ("these tests XYZ shouldn't be UI tests ... these tests are using anti-patterns ... etc") in the (hopefully not too) remote case a developer ignores the plan (it may happen!).

To recap:

- Current chat: very high level overview, warnings, items that the developer should absolutely not ignore (e.g. "needs verification")
- Migration plan: detailed and comprehensive information of the migration (hopefully developers read this)

If during execution you discover the plan was wrong about a specific file's test type (e.g. the planner said "API test" but the suite actually exercises a real user flow), pause and confirm with the user before changing course.

## Guardrails

- **The review gate is non-negotiable**: never proceed from step 1 to step 3 without explicit user approval, even if the plan looks obviously correct.
- **Step 1 is read-only**: do not create, modify, or delete any test files during planning. Only produce the plan document.
- **Deep on FTR, light on Scout**: every FTR finding in the plan must reference concrete file paths and line numbers. Scout recommendations stay at the decision level; the executor knows the APIs.
- **No guessing**: if you can't determine something (e.g. whether a feature flag is runtime-settable), flag it as `NEEDS VERIFICATION` rather than guessing.
- **Preserve intent**: when recommending dropping or converting a test, explain what coverage is lost and where it moves.
- **Machine-parseable plan**: use consistent Markdown headings, tables, and bullet formats so step 3 (and any reviewers) can parse sections programmatically.

## References

> - Plan output structure (every section, table, and bullet format): [`references/output-template.md`](references/output-template.md)

Reviewer: This (Plan output structure, `references/output-template.md`) should probably go to the dedicated planner Markdown file once we create it, not in the main skill file to not add noise to the main skill / not to confuse the agent.

## Inputs

Before starting, collect or confirm:

1. **FTR directory path**: the root of the FTR suite(s) to analyze (e.g. `x-pack/platform/test/functional/apps/dashboard`).
2. **FTR config path(s)**: the config file(s) that wire these tests. Walk up from the test directory if not provided.
3. **Target Scout module root**: where the Scout tests will live. If unknown, infer from the plugin that owns the FTR tests.
4. **Deployment targets**: stateful, serverless, or both. Default: both.

## Step 1 — Plan

Follow [`references/migration-planning.md`](references/migration-planning.md) to produce a migration plan in the target Scout module root. The plan answers _what_ should change and _why_; the executor answers _how_.

If a plan already exists for this source directory and matches the current FTR contents, skip to step 2.

## Step 2 — Review gate (stop)

After writing the plan, **stop**. Do not start touching test files.

Surface the plan to the user with this message (substitute the real path):

> > I generated a migration plan at `<path-to-the-plan-file>`. Please review it carefully — it captures the test-type decisions, batching, auth strategy, Cloud portability, and any flagged risks before any code changes. Reply when you're ready to proceed with the migration, or with any corrections to the plan.

Reviewer: Let's welcome questions here too:

```suggestion
> I generated a migration plan at `<path-to-the-plan-file>`. Please review it carefully — it captures the test-type decisions, batching, auth strategy, Cloud portability, and any flagged risks before any code changes. Reply when you're ready to proceed with the migration, or with any questions or corrections to the plan.
```

- **High-impact FTR smells**: anti-patterns that change behavior on migration (try/catch swallowing, hardcoded timeouts, shared mutable state, over-privileged execution, missing cleanup). Skip cosmetic ones — only call out what would surprise the user later.

Keep the chat summary tight. The plan file is the comprehensive doc; the chat summary is the can't-miss subset.

If the user pushes back on classifications, batching, or anything else, update the plan and re-surface. Only continue once the user explicitly approves.

## Step 3 — Execute

Once the user approves, follow [`references/migration-execution.md`](references/migration-execution.md) end to end. That file owns the file placement rules, FTR-to-Scout dependency mapping, `loadTestFile` splitting, helper extraction, and typecheck instructions.

If during execution you discover the plan was wrong about a specific file's test type (e.g. the planner said "API test" but the suite actually exercises a real user flow), pause and confirm with the user before changing course.

## Step 4 — Run and iterate

> Once execution is complete, run the new Scout tests and fix failures until they pass. Refer to [`docs/extend/scout/run-tests.md`](../../../docs/extend/scout/run-tests.md) for run-tests commands (stateful and serverless) and Cloud usage.

Reviewer: The docs don't mention how to run tests on Cloud, just on local stateful and local serverless: 

```suggestion
Once execution is complete, run the new Scout tests and fix failures until they pass. Refer to [`docs/extend/scout/run-tests.md`](../../../docs/extend/scout/run-tests.md) for run-tests commands (local stateful and the local serverless simulation).
```

(The [Run Scout tests on Cloud](https://docs.elastic.dev/appex-qa/scout/run-tests) are in our internal docs, but we shouldn't probably mention it)

> Once execution is complete, run the new Scout tests and fix failures until they pass. Refer to [`docs/extend/scout/run-tests.md`](../../../docs/extend/scout/run-tests.md) for run-tests commands (stateful and serverless) and Cloud usage.

Reviewer: I think Step 4 (running the tests) should be optional. Should we ask the user if we want to run / troubleshoot the tests for them? We're also happy to provide them with the commands to start the servers + run the tests if they prefer. What do you think?

Reviewer: Update: I've given it another thought and to be fair it's OK if this step isn't optional. The developer can still stop the agent from running if they want to take a look at the files first. So this looks good to me.

> Once execution is complete, run the new Scout tests and fix failures until they pass. Refer to [`docs/extend/scout/run-tests.md`](../../../docs/extend/scout/run-tests.md) for run-tests commands (stateful and serverless) and Cloud usage.

Reviewer: Let's add a recommendation here for the agent:

1. Start the test servers first with `node scripts/scout.js start-server ...`
2. Then run the tests with the `npx playwright test ...` command

This way we don't have to wait for the test servers to start every single time (this is what `node scripts/scout.js run-tests` does), leading to faster feedback loops.

Loop:

1. Run the migrated specs.
2. If failures, diagnose: missing cleanup, locator drift, fixture wiring, auth, tags, parallelism — usually one of these.
3. Fix and re-run.
4. Stop when all tests pass, or when you hit something that needs human judgment (genuinely unstable feature, missing source-code instrumentation, source bug). In that case, surface the blocker concisely and stop the loop.

> After the loop is green, follow the `scout-best-practices-reviewer` skill on the new spec files (and provide the removed FTR files as context for parity verification).

Reviewer: This step (`scout-best-practices-reviewer`) should likely be its dedicated own step; what do you think?
